In this segment I'm going to introduce
the way of doing parsing of context free
grammars exactly in polynomial time.
In particular, it will give us means
in finding the most probable parse
of a sentence according to
PCFG in polynomial time.
And the method that I'm going to
introduce is the famous parsing method in
the 60s called the CKY algorithm.
So, remember our goal in constituency
parsing is we start with a sentence.
This is the example we are going
to use fish people fish tanks.
We have a grammar with probabilities for
the roles in the PCFG and
what we want to do is find a sentence
structure that's licensed by the grammar.
And in the PCFG case, normally the most
probable sub-sentence structure.
And remember crucially what
we want to do is do this
without doing exponential amount of work.
And if we explore everything exhaustively,
since they can be an exponential number of
parses it will do
an exponential number of work.
But the CKY algorithm gives
us a cubic time algorithm but
it's in terms of the length
of the sentence and
the size of the grammar in terms of the
number of non-terminals that allows us to
do this by compact representation,
the use of dynamic programming, again.
And just like that edit distance
algorithm in the first week.
Let's see how it goes about doing that.
So, the secret of what it does is
it uses this data structure here,
which gets referred to
as a parse triangle.
Or also, quite commonly, as a chart.
And so
the way it works is that this cell here
is going to describe things
you can build over fish.
This square here is going to describe
things that you can build over people.
Then this square here is going to describe
things that you can build over
fish people and so on up.
And so what we can see is that since
this is basically half a square,
the number of squares that
we have is order n squared.
And so what we're going to show is that
we can fill in each square in order n.
And so the resulting
algorithm runs in cubic time.
So the secret to the CKY algorithm
is that we fill up this chart,
work in layers according
to the size of the span.
So the first thing we do is fill
in the cells for single words.
Then we fill in the second row of the
chart, and so these cells in the second
row of the chart are precisely
the cells that describe two words.
Then we fill up the third
row of the chart,
which are constituents that
are three words in length.
And finally we fill up the top cell and
that will give us categories that pass,
that cover the entire sentence.
Let's look in detail how we fill
in one of the cells of this chart.
So here we're assuming that we've
all ready filled in these two cells,
now actually according to the grammar
I'm using, I haven't filled them
exhaustively and I put in enough
that we can get the general idea.
And so what we then want to do, is to
fill in a cell above it, so we want to
fill in this cell up here that describes
the two word constituent people fish.
And the way we do it is what
we're going to do is build things
in the binary fashion by saying
let's take a constituent from here,
a constituent from here, and a grammar
rule that's able to combine them.
And then we can build the thing on
the left-hand side of the grammar
role with the probability that comes from
multiplying the three probabilities.
So what we're going to build, so
what we're going to build up here,
is that a noun phrase,
which is built from two noun phrases.
And it's probability is
going to be 0.35 times 0.14,
times the probability of the role 0.1 and
if you multiply that all together
that comes out to 0.0049.
Okay, but that's not the only thing
that we can build in this cell.
So we can also take this verb and
the same noun phrase and
then we can build a verb phrase
out of a verb and a noun phrase.
And so we're going to write
down that possibility as well.
So we're going to have VP goes to V NP.
And so the probability of that is going to
be 0.1 times 0.14 times 0.50,
which equals 0.007.
Okay, and then at that point we keep on
going and see what else we can build.
Well another thing that we can build is
that we can take this NP and the VP and
then we can combine them with
this S role right at the top.
So we can build here an S out of an NP and
a VP and the probability of that
is 0.35 times 0.06 times
S goes to NP VP, 0.9 and the product of
those is also,
no it's a different number the ones
we've seen before, 0.0189.
Okay, and we've run every binary
rule that we possibly could.
And one possibility is that they'll,
the collisions that we'll find multiple
ways of building an S or a VP.
I don't actually have an example of
that now but what I am going to do
is illustrate the same thing once
we extend on the unary rules.
So in my grand math I
also have unary rules.
So I have a rule like S
goes to VP right here.
So that rule can be applied
just inside this cell
since I can build a VP right here.
So I can also build S goes to VP here.
And the probability of that will be
the probability I calculated before,
0.007 times the probability
of that rule 0.1.
And then though that
multiplied out gets to 0.0007.
Okay, so at this point though if to
have my cubic time passing algorithm I'm
not wanting to store these two
ways of making S in a cell.
What I want to do is just recognize I can
build an S over this two word span and
for PCFG where I am trying to
find the most probable parse.
What I want to record is simply the best
way of making an S over that span was
precisely because the independence
assumptions of a PCFG,
if that constituent is used in the most
probable parse of the sentence,
what we'll be using is the best way
of making And is so for that span.
So in this case here, what I do is
compare the two ways of making an S and
here are their probabilities
0.0189 versus 0.0007,
so the S goes to NPVP as the higher
probability way of making an S and
so I keep that one and
I just don't store this one.
Okay, and so now I've filled in the cell,
I mean again actually strictly only
partially, for this higher up cell.
And so repeating that over and over,
moving up the chart is
the heart of the CKY algorithm.
Now the original CKY algorithm that's
just for normal form grammars,
which I showed earlier.
But as I indicated, you can easily extend
the CKY algorithm to handle unary roles.
It makes the algorithm kind of messier,
but it doesn't increase its
algorithmic complexity.
It turns out you can also easily extend
the CKY algorithm to handle empties.
Let's just look quickly
at how you do that.
So, if before we had the sentence,
people fish tanks.
Well the way we did things was we call
these words word numbers 1, 2 and 3.
And we build our CKY chart above them.
And this cell here is for the stuff
about of word one, the 1, 1 cell.
This is the 2, 2 cell and
this is the 3, 3 cell.
And then we call this one 1, 2, 2,
3 and this one is the 1, 3 cell.
And so we're measuring our
constituent spans from the first
word they contain to the last word
they contain, inclusive on both ends.
If instead of that we want to
work with empties in our grammar,
we use the trick of fence posts that you
see at various places in computer science.
So, we have the same sentence,
people fish tanks,
instead what we do is we put our
numbers between the words, 0, 1, 2, 3.
And then we build a chart over those
numbers which has four points, so we have.
So like that.
I guess I need to move
this 3 over a little.
Okay, so this then becomes the 0, 0 cell,
which will store any
empties that we put here.
And similarly,
this will become the 1, 1 cell,
the 2, 2 cell, and the 3, 3 cell.
And so each of these will store all and
only empty constituents.
And so, then the actual words
now have a span of one,
because it stretches from position 0 to 1.
So we're now going to put the actual
words in the second row of the chart,
and so they'll be the 0,
1, 1, 2, and 2, 3 entries.
At that point,
we just continue on as we did before.
So here we then have the 0,
2 and the 1, 3 entries.
And here we have the 0,
3 entry, which is again things
that span the whole sentence
from position 0 to 3.
But that could possibly include
empties here, empties here or
empties at any of these points in between.
I'm not going to go through this algorithm
in detail, but it's something that you
could work out for an exercise and see
that it does work in exactly the same way.
But what I do want to emphasize again is
this idea that binarization is vital.
The way you get cubic time
parsing algorithms for
CFGs is by doing binarization.
That means that each rule has at most
two things on the right hand side, and
that allows a cubic time algorithm.
As soon as you allow more than two things
on the right hand side, you're minimally
in a higher order polynomial algorithm,
and if you make no limits
as to how long the right hand side can be,
well then the algorithm is exponential.
So if you look at the literature for
CFG and PCFG parsing,
sometimes you see parsing algorithms that
explicitly work on binarized grammars.
That's going to be the case for
the CKY algorithm that I tell you, and so
we're going to transform our grammar
first then feed it to the CKY algorithm.
Some other grammars aren't like that.
So, this actually spelling the e in there,
they do the binarization internal for
the grammar.
So, the early algorithm looks like
it works on an arbitrary PCFG but
actually it does binarization internal
to the workings of the parser.
Okay, so here's the CKY algorithm
that we're going to use.
In the next segment,
we'll go through in detail how it works.
But let me just point out
a few things about it.
So we going to have
an array of scores where we
stored probabilities of
things that we can build.
So that for each span, so
these are the two span indices
from beginning and to and.
And then for each nonterminal,
we're going to record the probability of
building a constituent over
that span of a certain type.
And if you can't build a certain
nonterminal over span,
we'll say it's probability is zero.
And secondly, here, we're recording back
pointers, which is then saying that for
each nonterminal over each span,
we're recording a pointer as to
what was the best way of building
that nonterminal over the span.
What did you make it out of?
Now you don't actually have to store this.
This is one of these time space tradeoffs.
You can do parsing faster if you do
store this, because then once you get to
the end, you know the best way of building
every constituent over every span,
and so you can easily write
out the resulting parse tree.
But if you'd actually prefer to conserve
space, you don't have to store it.
So for example, in the Stanford parser, we
don't actually store these explicitly, and
we reconstruct the best paths simply from
knowing the scores in the score table.
And that's actually a fairly good tradeoff
because it greatly reduces the space
requirements and getting out the final
paths is actually still quite quick.
Okay, so this first part of the algorithm
is the part that is the part of
the lexicon where we're filling in
nonterminals that words can rewrite as.
And so it's pretty simple.
So we're going through each word and
then we're saying if we've got a rule for
nonterminal of A goes to tanks or
something,
then we're going to put its score
into this cell of the chart.
So it might a probability of 0.3.
And that's the main part
of the CKY algorithm.
And then everything down here
is dealing with unary rules.
So dealing with unary rules
is a bit more complex.
So once we have some things in a cell,
if we then have other unary rules
like B goes through A, well then if
we put this into a cell Well then,
we'll also be able to build
a B over the same span.
But the problem is we might then
also have a rule C goes to B, and
then we'll be able to
build a C over the span.
And in fact, we might even have a rule,
A goes to C,
which means we find another
way to build an A over a span.
So what we actually have to
do is keep on applying unary
rules until we stop discovering
new constituents that we
can build over a span with
better probabilities.
And so, that's what this does.
So this is a little check as to
whether we found a better way of
building a non-terminal in an individual
iteration of this while loop.
And so we consider all of our unary rules,
work out what probability they assigned
the category on the left hand side.
And if it's a better probability,
that's right here, we then store it in the
back trace and say we've done some work.
And providing we've done some work, well
then, we're going to, Do another iteration
right through the loop of checking out
all of the possible unary rules again.
Okay, but
this is still actually the easy part.
This is just the lexicon.
Then we go on and
actually build the rest of the chart.
And so that's this part.
So what we do is remember, we are ordering
our work by the size of constituent span.
So we start off with two
word span constituents and
build up to the length of the sentence.
And then we go across
the cells from left to right.
So we start with two word constituents
starting with position 0 and
then heading to the right most
position in our parse triangle.
This works out the end, and then this
is the crucial part of the algorithm.
So we're then saying okay,
maybe we're filling in a cell from 1 to 7.
And so
we're going to build it with binary rules.
And so that means it has
to be built in some ways.
So it can be built with something
from 1 to 4, and 4 to 7, or
alternatively, it could be built with
something from 1 to 2, and 2 to 7.
And so we have to try out these
different possibilities, and
that's the choice of the split point.
And then once we've
decided the split point,
we're going to consider all grammar rules.
If they exist, we work out the probability
of building the left hand side,
so imagine we have a rule, A goes to BC.
The probability of building
an A over this span in terms
of if you build a B here and
a C there, and we just work out
those three probabilities and
multiply them together.
Okay, and if we found a better way
of building an A over that span,
we record it.
And so again,
that's the heart of the CKY algorithm for
binary rules working higher up the chart.
All the rest of this is then
again handling unaries,
which we do in exactly
the same way as before.
Over each span, we then say, well, do we
also have a rule that says D goes to A?
If so, we can also go to D, and then we
have to repeat this over and over again,
until we've stopped being able to
build anything better than before.
Okay, so then, that was for
one cell of the chart.
And so then we're finishing off our for
loops for
the different beginning points working
across rows of our chart and then for
the different spans working
up the path's triangles.
So we go across here,
then kind of hit up like this.
Okay, and so then when we're done,
we found the best way to build every
constituent over every
non-terminal over every span.
And we've in particular found what you
can build right in the top cell here.
And if we have a start category, we know
that we want to build that start category.
So at that point, we can use this
chart to look down at and find
the highest probability paths for sentence
and simply return that back to the user.
And there's obviously not a bit of
algorithm here, which I'm admitting for
now, but I think it should be
fairly clear how to do that.
So, there's a lot to grasp here.
And I think it will take
seeing the concrete example in
the next segment before
this makes any sense.
That this algorithm does give a very easy
way to see why this is an algorithm that
is cubic,
both in the length of the sentence and
in the number of
non-terminals in the grammar.
So if you look at what we have here,
we have a for loop of the span size,
which is of order
the length of the sentence.
You have a for loop of the beginning,
which is order length of the sentence.
And then you have a for
loop of the split point,
which is order length of the sentence.
So we're O (n cubed) in terms
of the length of the sentence.
And then once we start
exploring grammar rules,
we're considering all triples
of non-terminals, and so
then we order g cubed for the number
of non-terminals in the grammar.
So I'm saying that the size of
the set of non-terminals equals g.
But let me mention for when you guys
are implementing your own version that
this is the simplistic way of doing it,
which is
a polynomial algorithm with the right
minimal order of complexity.
But in practice,
if you want to have a fast,
PCFG parser,
you don't want to naively do this.
Rather, you want to be doing some checking
and indexing to make things go fast.
So, the kind of thing that you want to
do is not just naively iterate over
all triples of non-terminals,
but instead, to say, well,
once I've got to here,
I know that I'm loading, say, from 0 to 4,
and 4 to 7, loading up to 0 to 7.
So, I know what constituents
I could build over 0 to 4.
What I actually want to do is say that
each of these things is in this list.
Okay, tell me what grammar
rules have this as that
each one of these as if
they're left corner.
So perhaps you have S goes to NP VP, but
you might also have NP goes to NP PP.
So these are both rules that
have NP as their left corner.
So these are precisely the rules
that are going to be ones that will
work down here because they
work with this category.
And so by doing some clever indexing,
you can make things quite a lot faster.
Okay, so that's the CKY algorithm.
I'm sure it's kind of
confusing up until now.
I hope it will become a lot clearer once
we work through an example in the next
segment.